A machine learning framework for predicting and characterizing DNA methylation and hydroxymethylation in mammalian genomes.
5-Methylcytosine and 5-Hydroxymethylcytosine in DNA are major epigenetic modifications known to significantly alter mammalian gene expression. High-throughput assays to detect these modifications are expensive, labor-intensive, unfeasible in some contexts, and leave a portion of the genome unqueried. Hence, we devised a novel, supervised, integrative learning framework to perform whole-genome methylation and hydroxymethylation predictions in CpG dinucleotides. Our framework can also perform imputation of missing or low quality data in existing sequencing datasets. Additionally, we developed infrastructure to perform in silico , high-throughput hypotheses testing on such predicted methylation or hydroxymethylation maps.
We test our approach on H1 human embryonic stem cells and H1-derived neural progenitor cells. Our predictive model is comparable in accuracy to other state-of-the-art DNA methylation prediction algorithms. We are the first to predict hydroxymethylation in silico with high whole-genome accuracy, paving the way for large-scale reconstruction of hydroxymethylation maps in mammalian model systems. We designed a novel, beam-search driven feature selection algorithm to identify the most discriminative predictor variables, and developed a platform for performing integrative analysis and reconstruction of the epigenome. Our toolkit DIRECTION provides predictions at single nucleotide resolution and identifies relevant features based on resource availability. This offers enhanced biological interpretability of results potentially leading to a better understanding of epigenetic gene regulation.

New mutations in non-syndromic primary ovarian insufficiency patients identified via whole-exome sequencing.
Is it possible to identify new mutations potentially associated with non-syndromic primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) via whole-exome sequencing (WES)?
WES is an efficient tool to study genetic causes of POI as we have identified new mutations, some of which lead to protein destablization potentially contributing to the disease etiology.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY:
POI is a frequently occurring complex pathology leading to infertility. Mutations in only few candidate genes, mainly identified by Sanger sequencing, have been definitively related to the pathogenesis of the disease.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION:
This is a retrospective cohort study performed on 69 women affected by POI.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS:
WES and an innovative bioinformatics analysis were used on non-synonymous sequence variants in a subset of 420 selected POI candidate genes. Mutations in BMPR1B and GREM1 were modeled by using fragment molecular orbital analysis.
Fifty-five coding variants in 49 genes potentially related to POI were identified in 33 out of 69 patients (48%). These genes participate in key biological processes in the ovary, such as meiosis, follicular development, granulosa cell differentiation/proliferation and ovulation. The presence of at least two mutations in distinct genes in 42% of the patients argued in favor of a polygenic nature of POI.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION:
It is possible that regulatory regions, not analyzed in the present study, carry further variants related to POI.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS:
WES and the in silico analyses presented here represent an efficient approach for mapping variants associated with POI etiology. Sequence variants presented here represents potential future genetic biomarkers.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTEREST(S):
This study was supported by the Universidad del Rosario and Colciencias (Grants CS/CIGGUR-ABN062-2016 and 672-2014). Colciencias supported Liliana Catherine Patiño´s work (Fellowship: 617, 2013). The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Single-cell regulome data analysis by SCRAT.
Emerging single-cell technologies (e.g., single-cell ATAC-seq, DNase-seq or ChIP-seq) have made it possible to assay regulome of individual cells. Single-cell regulome data are highly sparse and discrete. Analyzing such data is challenging. User-friendly software tools are still lacking. We present SCRAT, a Single-Cell Regulome Analysis Toolbox with a graphical user interface, for studying cell heterogeneity using single-cell regulome data. SCRAT can be used to conveniently summarize regulatory activities according to different features (e.g., gene sets, transcription factor binding motif sites, etc.). Using these features, users can identify cell subpopulations in a heterogeneous biological sample, infer cell identities of each subpopulation, and discover distinguishing features such as gene sets and transcription factors that show different activities among subpopulations.
Systematic, multiparametric analysis of Mycobacterium tuberculosis intracellular infection offers insight into coordinated virulence.
A key to the pathogenic success of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), the causative agent of tuberculosis, is the capacity to survive within host macrophages. Although several factors required for this survival have been identified, a comprehensive knowledge of such factors and how they work together to manipulate the host environment to benefit bacterial survival are not well understood. To systematically identify Mtb factors required for intracellular growth, we screened an arrayed, non-redundant Mtb transposon mutant library by high-content imaging to characterize the mutant-macrophage interaction. Based on a combination of imaging features, we identified mutants impaired for intracellular survival. We then characterized the phenotype of infection with each mutant by profiling the induced macrophage cytokine response. Taking a systems-level approach to understanding the biology of identified mutants, we performed a multiparametric analysis combining pathogen and host phenotypes to predict functional relationships between mutants based on clustering. Strikingly, mutants defective in two well-known virulence factors, the ESX-1 protein secretion system and the virulence lipid phthiocerol dimycocerosate (PDIM), clustered together. Building upon the shared phenotype of loss of the macrophage type I interferon (IFN) response to infection, we found that PDIM production and export are required for coordinated secretion of ESX-1-substrates, for phagosomal permeabilization, and for downstream induction of the type I IFN response. Multiparametric clustering also identified two novel genes that are required for PDIM production and induction of the type I IFN response. Thus, multiparametric analysis combining host and pathogen infection phenotypes can be used to identify novel functional relationships between genes that play a role in infection.
An independent component analysis confounding factor correction framework for identifying broad impact expression quantitative trait loci.
Genome-wide expression Quantitative Trait Loci (eQTL) studies in humans have provided numerous insights into the genetics of both gene expression and complex diseases. While the majority of eQTL identified in genome-wide analyses impact a single gene, eQTL that impact many genes are particularly valuable for network modeling and disease analysis. To enable the identification of such broad impact eQTL, we introduce CONFETI: Confounding Factor Estimation Through Independent component analysis. CONFETI is designed to address two conflicting issues when searching for broad impact eQTL: the need to account for non-genetic confounding factors that can lower the power of the analysis or produce broad impact eQTL false positives, and the tendency of methods that account for confounding factors to model broad impact eQTL as non-genetic variation. The key advance of the CONFETI framework is the use of Independent Component Analysis (ICA) to identify variation likely caused by broad impact eQTL when constructing the sample covariance matrix used for the random effect in a mixed model. We show that CONFETI has better performance than other mixed model confounding factor methods when considering broad impact eQTL recovery from synthetic data. We also used the CONFETI framework and these same confounding factor methods to identify eQTL that replicate between matched twin pair datasets in the Multiple Tissue Human Expression Resource (MuTHER), the Depression Genes Networks study (DGN), the Netherlands Study of Depression and Anxiety (NESDA), and multiple tissue types in the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) consortium. These analyses identified both cis-eQTL and trans-eQTL impacting individual genes, and CONFETI had better or comparable performance to other mixed model confounding factor analysis methods when identifying such eQTL. In these analyses, we were able to identify and replicate a few broad impact eQTL although the overall number was small even when applying CONFETI. In light of these results, we discuss the broad impact eQTL that have been previously reported from the analysis of human data and suggest that considerable caution should be exercised when making biological inferences based on these reported eQTL.

Novel MYC-driven medulloblastoma models from multiple embryonic cerebellar cells.
Group3 medulloblastoma (MBG3) that predominantly occur in young children are usually associated with MYC amplification and/or overexpression, frequent metastasis and a dismal prognosis. Physiologically relevant MBG3 models are currently lacking, making inferences related to their cellular origin thus far limited. Using in utero electroporation, we here report that MBG3 mouse models can be developed in situ from different multipotent embryonic cerebellar progenitor cells via conditional expression of Myc and loss of Trp53 function in several Cre driver mouse lines. The Blbp-Cre driver that targets embryonic neural progenitors induced tumors exhibiting a large-cell/anaplastic histopathology adjacent to the fourth ventricle, recapitulating human MBG3. Enforced co-expression of luciferase together with Myc and a dominant-negative form of Trp53 revealed that GABAergic neuronal progenitors as well as cerebellar granule cells give rise to MBG3 with their distinct growth kinetics. Cross-species gene expression analysis revealed that these novel MBG3 models shared molecular characteristics with human MBG3, irrespective of their cellular origin. We here developed MBG3 mouse models in their physiological environment and we show that oncogenic insults drive this MB subgroup in different cerebellar lineages rather than in a specific cell of origin.Oncogene advance online publication, 15 May 2017; doi:10.1038/onc.2017.110.

Bioinformatics Analysis on Molecular Mechanism of Green tea Compound Epigallocatechin-3-Gallate Against Ovarian Cancer.
Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) is the most abundant and biologically active catechin in green tea, and it exerts multiple effects in humans through mechanisms that remain to be clarified. The present study used bioinformatics to identify possible mechanisms by which EGCG reduces risk of ovarian cancer. Possible human protein targets of EGCG were identified in the PubChem database, possible human gene targets were identified in the NCBI database, and then both sets of targets were analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. The results suggest that signaling proteins affected by EGCG in ovarian cancer, which include JUN, FADD, NFKB1, Bcl-2, HIF1α, and MMP, are involved primarily in cell cycle; cellular assembly and organization; DNA replication, etc. These results identify several specific proteins and pathways that may be affected by EGCG in ovarian cancer, and they illustrate the power of integrative informatics and chemical fragment analysis for focusing mechanistic studies. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

Probabilistic modeling of bifurcations in single-cell gene expression data using a Bayesian mixture of factor analyzers.
Modeling bifurcations in single-cell transcriptomics data has become an increasingly popular field of research. Several methods have been proposed to infer bifurcation structure from such data, but all rely on heuristic non-probabilistic inference. Here we propose the first generative, fully probabilistic model for such inference based on a Bayesian hierarchical mixture of factor analyzers. Our model exhibits competitive performance on large datasets despite implementing full Markov-Chain Monte Carlo sampling, and its unique hierarchical prior structure enables automatic determination of genes driving the bifurcation process. We additionally propose an Empirical-Bayes like extension that deals with the high levels of zero-inflation in single-cell RNA-seq data and quantify when such models are useful. We apply or model to both real and simulated single-cell gene expression data and compare the results to existing pseudotime methods. Finally, we discuss both the merits and weaknesses of such a unified, probabilistic approach in the context practical bioinformatics analyses.

Comparative analysis of osteoblast gene expression profiles and Runx2 genomic occupancy of mouse and human osteoblasts in vitro.
Fast progress of the next generation sequencing (NGS) technology has allowed global transcriptional profiling and genome-wide mapping of transcription factor binding sites in various cellular contexts. However, limited number of replicates and high amount of data processing may weaken the significance of the findings. Comparative analyses of independent data sets acquired in the different laboratories would greatly increase the validity of the data. Runx2 is the key transcription factor regulating osteoblast differentiation and bone formation. We performed a comparative analysis of three published Runx2 data sets of chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by deep sequencing (ChIP-seq) analysis in osteoblasts from mouse and human origin. Moreover, we assessed the similarity of the corresponding transcription data of these studies available online. The ChIP-seq data analysis confirmed general features of Runx2 binding, including location at genic vs intergenic regions and abundant Runx2 binding on promoters of the highly expressed genes. We also found high frequency of Runx2 DNA binding without a consensus Runx2 motif at the binding site. Importantly, mouse and human Runx2 showed moderately similar binding patterns in terms of peak-associated closest genes and their associated genomic ontology (GO) pathways. Accordingly, the gene expression profiles were highly similar and osteoblastic phenotype was prominent in the differentiated stage in both species. In conclusion, ChIP-seq method shows good reproducibility in the context of mature osteoblasts, and mouse and human osteoblast models resemble each other closely in Runx2 binding and in gene expression profiles, supporting the use of these models as adequate tools in studying osteoblast differentiation.

No association detected between seven common variants in the CDKAL1 gene and gestational glycemic traits.
Elevated plasma glucose levels in pregnancy increase adverse pregnancy outcomes. Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 regulatory subunit-associated protein 1-like 1 (CDKAL1) has been shown to be involved in insulin secretion in pancreatic β cells. In this study, we investigated the impact of genetic variants in CDKAL1 on plasma glucose, insulin values, β cell function and insulin resistance in the fasted state as well as plasma glucose 1 h after the consumption of a 50-g oral glucose load between 24 and 28 weeks of pregnancy among 929 unrelated pregnant Han Chinese women. Seven common variants previously reported to associate with diabetes were genotyped. Insulin resistance and β cell function were assessed by homeostasis model assessment. The genetic impacts were analyzed using analysis of variance and analysis of covariance. The results showed that there was no significant association between any of the seven variants and those gestational glycemic traits. Therefore, this study suggests that the seven common variants in CDKAL1 are not significant factors for the variations of several gestational glycemic traits in the Han Chinese population. However, further well-designed studies with larger sample size, more ethnic groups and more CDKAL1 variants are required to validate the association between CDKAL1 and gestational glycemic traits.

Preliminary spectrum of genetic variants in familial hypercholesterolemia in Argentina.
Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a genetic disorder characterized by elevated low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and early cardiovascular disease. As cardiovascular disease is a leading cause of mortality in Argentina, early identification of patients with FH is of great public health importance.
The aim of our study was to identify families with FH and to approximate to the characterization of the genetic spectrum mutations of FH in Argentina.
Thirty-three not related index cases were selected with clinical diagnosis of FH. Genetic analysis was performed by sequencing, multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification, and bioinformatics tools.
Twenty genetic variants were identified among 24 cases (73%), 95% on the low-density lipoprotein receptor gene. The only variant on APOB was the R3527Q. Four were novel variants: c.-135C>A, c.170A>C p.(Asp57Ala), c.684G>C p.(Glu228Asp), and c.1895A>T p.(Asn632Ile); the bioinformatics' analysis revealed clear destabilizing effects for 2 of them. The exon 14 presented the highest number of variants (32%). Four variants were observed in more than 1 case and the c.2043C>A p.(Cys681*) was carried by 18% of index cases. Two true homozygotes, 3 compound heterozygotes, and 1 double heterozygote were identified.
This study characterizes for the first time in Argentina genetic variants associated with FH and suggest that the allelic heterogeneity of the FH in the country could have 1 relative common low-density lipoprotein receptor mutation. This knowledge is important for the genotype-phenotype correlation and for optimizing both cholesterol-lowering therapies and mutational analysis protocols. In addition, these data contribute to the understanding of the molecular basis of FH in Argentina.

Functional analysis by minigene assay of putative splicing variants found in Bardet-Biedl syndrome patients.
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) and Alström syndrome (ALMS) are rare diseases belonging to the group of ciliopathies. Although mutational screening studies of BBS/ALMS cohorts have been extensively reported, little is known about the functional effect of those changes. Thus, splicing variants are estimated to represent 15% of disease-causing mutations, and there is growing evidence that many exonic changes are really splicing variants misclassified. In this study, we aimed to analyse for the first time several variants in BBS2, ARL6/BBS3, BBS4 and ALMS1 genes predicted to produce aberrant splicing by minigene assay. We found discordance between bioinformatics analysis and experimental data when comparing wild-type and mutant constructs. Remarkably, we identified nonsense variants presumably resistant to nonsense-mediated decay, even when a premature termination codon would be introduced in the second amino acid (p.(G2*) mutation in ARL6/BBS3 gene). As a whole, we report one of the first functional studies of BBS/ALMS1 variants using minigene assay, trying to elucidate their role in disease. Functional studies of variants identified in BBS and ALMS patients are essential for their proper classification and subsequent genetic counselling and could also be the start point for new therapeutic approaches, currently based only on symptomatic treatment.

Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics analysis reveals chondroprotective effects of astragaloside IV in interleukin-1β-induced SW1353 chondrocyte-like cells.
Chondrocyte apoptosis played a key role on the progression of Osteoarthritis (OA). Safe and effective drugs are urgently needed for the treatment of OA. Previous study reported that Astragaloside IV (ASG-IV) had exerted a protective effect against articular cartilage degeneration by promoting rapid proliferation of chondrocyte. Therefore, the aim of our study is to explore the effects and mechanisms of ASG-IV in chondrocyte apoptosis.
Isobaric Tags For Relative And Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ)-based quantitative proteomics was used to quantitatively detect and map proteins in SW1353 chondrocyte-like cells pre-treated with ASG-IV or interleukin-1β (IL-1β) or ASG-IV+IL-1β. The iTRAQ-labeled peptides were fractionated by high-accuracy liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Cell apoptosis and differentially expressed proteins was detected by flow cytometry (FCM), quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), and western blotting, respectively.

The apoptosis of the IL-1β-induced SW1353 cells treated with ASG-IV was greatly inhibited. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that gamma actin 1 (ACTG1) and Yes Associated Protein 1 (YAP1), participating in the Hippo signaling pathway and Vitronectin (VTN) and Collagen Type I Alpha 1 Chain (COL1A1), involving in the extracellular matrix (ECM)-receptor interaction signaling pathway, were all significantly up-regulated in the IL-1β-induced SW1353 cells after treatment with ASG-IV. The qRT-PCR and Western blotting results confirmed the up-regulation of these four genes.

ASG-IV played a positive role in human osteoarthritic chondrocyte apoptosis, possibly through modulation of the Hippo signaling pathway by up-regulating YAP1and ACTG1 expression, and also by up-regulating VTN and COL1A1, which are involved in the ECM-receptor interaction pathway. Taken together, all the results suggested that ASG-IV had a novel therapeutic potential for the treatment of OA.

Altered expression of four miRNA (miR-1238-3p, miR-202-3p, miR-630 and miR-766-3p) and their potential targets in peripheral blood from vitiligo patients.
Vitiligo is an acquired skin disease with pigmentary disorder. Autoimmune destruction of melanocytes is thought to be major factor in the etiology of vitiligo. miRNA-based regulators of gene expression have been reported to play crucial roles in autoimmune disease. Therefore, we attempt to profile the miRNA expressions and predict their potential targets, assessing the biological functions of differentially expressed miRNA. Total RNA was extracted from peripheral blood of vitiligo (experimental group, n = 5) and non-vitiligo (control group, n = 5) age-matched patients. Samples were hybridized to a miRNA array. Box, scatter and principal component analysis plots were performed, followed by unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis to classify the samples. Quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was conducted for validation of microarray data. Three different databases, TargetScan, PITA and microRNA.org, were used to predict the potential target genes. Gene ontology (GO) annotation and pathway analysis were performed to assess the potential functions of predicted genes of identified miRNA. A total of 100 (29 upregulated and 71 downregulated) miRNA were filtered by volcano plot analysis. Four miRNA were validated by quantitative RT-PCR as significantly downregulated in the vitiligo group. The functions of predicted target genes associated with differentially expressed miRNA were assessed by GO analysis, showing that the GO term with most significantly enriched target genes was axon guidance, and that the axon guidance pathway was most significantly correlated with these miRNA. In conclusion, we identified four downregulated miRNA in vitiligo and assessed the potential functions of target genes related to these differentially expressed miRNA.

Identification and characterization of a grain micronutrient-related OsFRO2 rice gene ortholog from micronutrient-rich little millet (Panicum sumatrense).
Minor millets are considered as nutrient-rich cereals having significant effect in improving human health. In this study, a rice ortholog of Ferric Chelate Reductase (FRO2) gene involved in plant metal uptake has been identified in iron-rich Little millet (LM) using PCR and next generation sequencing-based strategy. FRO2 gene-specific primers designed from rice genome amplified 2.7 Kb fragment in LM genotype RLM-37. Computational genomics analyses of the sequenced amplicon showed high level sequence similarity with rice OsFRO2 gene. The predicted gene structure showed the presence of 6 exons and 5 introns and its protein sequence was found to contain ferric reductase and NOX_Duox_Like_FAD_NADP domains. Further, 3D structure analysis of FCR-LM model protein (494 amino acids) shows that it has 18 helices, 10 beta sheets, 10 strands, 41 beta turn and 5 gamma turn with slight deviation from the FCR-Os structure. Besides, the structures of FCR-LM and FCR-Os were modelled followed by molecular dynamics simulations. The overall study revealed both sequence and structural similarity between the identified gene and OsFRO2. Thus, a putative ferric chelate reductase gene has been identified in LM paving the way for using this approach for identification of orthologs of other metal genes from millets. This also facilitates mining of effective alleles of known genes for improvement of staple crops like rice.

RNAi-Mediated Reverse Genetic Screen Identified Drosophila Chaperones Regulating Eye and Neuromuscular Junction Morphology.
Accumulation of toxic proteins in neurons have been linked with the onset of neurodegenerative diseases, which in many cases, are characterized by altered neuronal function and synapse loss. Molecular chaperones help protein folding and resolubilization of unfolded proteins thereby reducing the protein aggregation stress. While most of the chaperones are expressed in neurons, their functional relevance largely remains unknown. Here, using bioinformatics analysis, we identified 95 Drosophila chaperones and classified them into seven different classes. Ubiquitous actin5C-Gal4 mediated RNAi knockdown revealed that about 50% of the chaperones are essential in Drosophila Knocking down these genes in eyes revealed that about 30% of the essential chaperones are crucial for eye development. Using neuron-specific knockdown, immunocytochemistry and robust behavioural assays, we identified a new set of chaperones that play critical roles in the regulation of Drosophila NMJ structural organization. Together, our data presents the first classification and comprehensive analysis of Drosophila chaperones. Our screen identified new set of chaperones that regulate eye and NMJ morphogenesis. Outcome of the screen reported here provides a useful resource for further elucidating the role of individual chaperones in Drosophila eye morphogenesis and synaptic development.

Ranking metrics in gene set enrichment analysis: do they matter?

There exist many methods for describing the complex relation between changes of gene expression in molecular pathways or gene ontologies under different experimental conditions. Among them, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis seems to be one of the most commonly used (over 10,000 citations). An important parameter, which could affect the final result, is the choice of a metric for the ranking of genes. Applying a default ranking metric may lead to poor results.

In this work 28 benchmark data sets were used to evaluate the sensitivity and false positive rate of gene set analysis for 16 different ranking metrics including new proposals. Furthermore, the robustness of the chosen methods to sample size was tested. Using k-means clustering algorithm a group of four metrics with the highest performance in terms of overall sensitivity, overall false positive rate and computational load was established i.e. absolute value of Moderated Welch Test statistic, Minimum Significant Difference, absolute value of Signal-To-Noise ratio and Baumgartner-Weiss-Schindler test statistic. In case of false positive rate estimation, all selected ranking metrics were robust with respect to sample size. In case of sensitivity, the absolute value of Moderated Welch Test statistic and absolute value of Signal-To-Noise ratio gave stable results, while Baumgartner-Weiss-Schindler and Minimum Significant Difference showed better results for larger sample size. Finally, the Gene Set Enrichment Analysis method with all tested ranking metrics was parallelised and implemented in MATLAB, and is available at https://github.com/ZAEDPolSl/MrGSEA .

Choosing a ranking metric in Gene Set Enrichment Analysis has critical impact on results of pathway enrichment analysis. The absolute value of Moderated Welch Test has the best overall sensitivity and Minimum Significant Difference has the best overall specificity of gene set analysis. When the number of non-normally distributed genes is high, using Baumgartner-Weiss-Schindler test statistic gives better outcomes. Also, it finds more enriched pathways than other tested metrics, which may induce new biological discoveries.

Cattle genome-wide analysis reveals genetic signatures in trypanotolerant N'Dama.

Indigenous cattle in Africa have adapted to various local environments to acquire superior phenotypes that enhance their survival under harsh conditions. While many studies investigated the adaptation of overall African cattle, genetic characteristics of each breed have been poorly studied.

We performed the comparative genome-wide analysis to assess evidence for subspeciation within species at the genetic level in trypanotolerant N'Dama cattle. We analysed genetic variation patterns in N'Dama from the genomes of 101 cattle breeds including 48 samples of five indigenous African cattle breeds and 53 samples of various commercial breeds. Analysis of SNP variances between cattle breeds using wMI, XP-CLR, and XP-EHH detected genes containing N'Dama-specific genetic variants and their potential associations. Functional annotation analysis revealed that these genes are associated with ossification, neurological and immune system. Particularly, the genes involved in bone formation indicate that local adaptation of N'Dama may engage in skeletal growth as well as immune systems.

Our results imply that N'Dama might have acquired distinct genotypes associated with growth and regulation of regional diseases including trypanosomiasis. Moreover, this study offers significant insights into identifying genetic signatures for natural and artificial selection of diverse African cattle breeds.

Epimetheus - a multi-profile normalizer for epigenomic sequencing data.

Exponentially increasing numbers of NGS-based epigenomic datasets in public repositories like GEO constitute an enormous source of information that is invaluable for integrative and comparative studies of gene regulatory mechanisms. One of today's challenges for such studies is to identify functionally informative local and global patterns of chromatin states in order to describe the regulatory impact of the epigenome in normal cell physiology and in case of pathological aberrations. Critically, the most preferred Chromatin ImmunoPrecipitation-Sequencing (ChIP-Seq) is inherently prone to significant variability between assays, which poses significant challenge on comparative studies. One challenge concerns data normalization to adjust sequencing depth variation.

Currently existing tools either apply linear scaling corrections and/or are restricted to specific genomic regions, which can be prone to biases. To overcome these restrictions without any external biases, we developed Epimetheus, a genome-wide quantile-based multi-profile normalization tool for histone modification data and related datasets.

Epimetheus has been successfully used to normalize epigenomics data in previous studies on X inactivation in breast cancer and in integrative studies of neuronal cell fate acquisition and tumorigenic transformation; Epimetheus is freely available to the scientific community.

The dynamics of early-state transcriptional changes and aggregate formation in a Huntington's disease cell model.

Huntington's disease (HD) is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder caused by a CAG expansion in the Huntingtin (HTT) gene. Proteolytic cleavage of mutant huntingtin (Htt) protein with an expanded polyglutamine (polyQ) stretch results in production of Htt fragments that aggregate and induce impaired ubiquitin proteasome, mitochondrial functioning and transcriptional dysregulation. To understand the time-resolved relationship between aggregate formation and transcriptional changes at early disease stages, we performed temporal transcriptome profiling and quantification of aggregate formation in living cells in an inducible HD cell model.

Rat pheochromocytoma (PC12) cells containing a stably integrated, doxycycline-inducible, eGFP-tagged N-terminal human Htt fragment with an expanded polyQ domain were used to analyse gene expression changes at different stages of mutant Htt aggregation. At earliest time points after doxycycline induction no detectable aggregates and few changes in gene expression were observed. Aggregates started to appear at intermediate time points. Aggregate formation and subsequent enlargement of aggregates coincided with a rapid increase in the number of differentially expressed (DE) genes. The increase in number of large aggregates coincided with a decrease in the number of smaller aggregates whereas the transcription profile reverted towards the profile observed before mutant Htt induction. Cluster-based analysis of the 2,176 differentially expressed genes revealed fourteen distinct clusters responding differently over time. Functional enrichment analysis of the two major gene clusters revealed that genes in the up-regulated cluster were mainly involved in metabolic (antioxidant activity and cellular ketone metabolic processes) and genes in the down-regulated cluster in developmental processes, respectively. Promoter-based analysis of the identified gene clusters resulted in identification of a transcription factor network of which several previously have been linked to HD.

We demonstrate a time-resolved relationship between Htt aggregation and changes in the transcriptional profile. We identified two major gene clusters showing involvement of (i) mitochondrial dysfunction and (ii) developmental processes implying cellular homeostasis defects. We identified novel and known HD-linked transcription factors and show their interaction with known and predicted regulatory proteins. Our data provide a novel resource for hypothesis building on the role of transcriptional key regulators in early stages of HD and possibly other polyQ-dependent diseases.